---
title: "Markdown to Book"
date: 2026-03-03
extra:
  meta_description:
    - "Download package: [markdown-to-book.zip](/media/works/project/files/markdown-to-book.zip)"
    - "This project is based on [AG Lab](http://lab.ag.co.kr/)’s [Markdown to InDesign](http://lab.ag.co.kr/hyperlinks/markdown-to-indesign)"
  notes:
    - id: "1"
      text: "Markdown is a formatting syntax that defines textual hierarchy and structure using simple symbols. More precisely, it is a lightweight markup language originally designed for use on the web, allowing users to create structured documents without complex tags."
  doc_no: "23"
  category: "Project"
  date_sort: "2026-03-03"
  date_year: "2026"
  date_ym: "Mar 2026"
  format: "Script"
---
*Markdown to Book* is an automation technique that converts manuscripts written in Markdown into InDesign booklet data.
<br><br>
By writing a document in Markdown[^1], users can define the structure of a manuscript through simple syntax. If an editor delivers a manuscript written in Markdown to a designer, the communication required to clarify structural hierarchy can be reduced. This idea was implemented by [AG Lab]([http://lab.ag.co.kr/](http://lab.ag.co.kr/)) in [Markdown to InDesign](http://lab.ag.co.kr/hyperlinks/markdown-to-indesign). That project proposes a processing method that uses InDesign’s GREP to convert Markdown syntax into predefined styles. But what if this process were executed automatically, in a single batch?
<br><br>
While [Markdown to InDesign](http://lab.ag.co.kr/hyperlinks/markdown-to-indesign) assumes efficiency within a professional production environment, *Markdown to Book* focuses on accessibility for small-scale publishing. Rather than functioning primarily as a communication tool between editor and designer, it is closer to a DIY approach—enabling a single individual to complete the entire process from A to Z. This automation technology runs as an InDesign script. With just a few clicks, users can convert a manuscript into print-ready data. Of course, this does not replace a professional publishing environment. Instead, it creates the conditions for someone who primarily handles text to independently complete its formal realization. In doing so, it connects the act of writing with the act of bookmaking.
<br><br>
Through this process, I hope *Markdown to Book* functions not only as a mechanical device, but also as an interface—something closer to an instrument.

[^1]: Markdown is a formatting syntax that defines textual hierarchy and structure using simple symbols. More precisely, it is a lightweight markup language originally designed for use on the web, allowing users to create structured documents without complex tags.